Add blog for Manifest Based Admission Control Config alpha (#54422)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026-xx-xx-kubernetes-v1-36-manifest-based-admission-control.md

Reviewer: (nit) We no longer put the date in the filename.

Kubernetes v1.36 introduces an alpha feature that addresses this:
*manifest-based admission control*. It lets you define admission webhooks
and CEL-based policies as files on disk, loaded by the API server at
startup, before it serves any requests.

## The gap we're closing

Most Kubernetes policy enforcement today works through the API. You create
a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy or a webhook configuration as an API object,
and the admission controller picks it up. This works well in steady state,
but it has some fundamental limitations.

During cluster bootstrap, there's a gap between when the API server starts
serving requests and when your policies are created and active. If you're
restoring from a backup or recovering from an etcd failure, that gap can be
significant.

There's also a self-protection problem. Admission webhooks and policies
can't intercept operations on their own configuration resources. Kubernetes
skips invoking webhooks on types like ValidatingWebhookConfiguration to
avoid circular dependencies. That means a sufficiently privileged user can
delete your critical admission policies, and there's nothing in the
admission chain to stop them.

> We wanted a way to say "these policies are always on, full stop."

Reviewer: Does "we" mean Anish Ramasekar and Benjamin Elder? If that's not what's meant, I recommend rewording.

recovery path doesn't go through the API.

This means you can write a manifest-based policy that prevents deletion of
your critical API-based admission policies. For platform teams managing
shared clusters, this is a significant improvement. You can now guarantee
that your baseline security policies can't be removed by a cluster admin,
accidentally or otherwise.

Here's what that looks like in practice. This policy prevents any
modification or deletion of admission resources that carry the
`platform.example.com/protected: "true"` label:

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: "protect-policies.static.k8s.io"
spec:
  failurePolicy: Fail
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
    - apiGroups: ["admissionregistration.k8s.io"]
      apiVersions: ["*"]
      operations: ["DELETE", "UPDATE"]
      resources:
      - "validatingadmissionpolicies"
      - "validatingadmissionpolicybindings"
      - "validatingwebhookconfigurations"
      - "mutatingwebhookconfigurations"
  validations:
  - expression: >-
      !has(object.metadata.labels) ||
      !('platform.example.com/protected' in object.metadata.labels) ||

>       object.metadata.labels['platform.example.com/protected'] != 'true'

Reviewer 2: Gemini actually caught this one for me ... (went over this by hand, and then with gemini)

---

The `protect-policies.static.k8s.io` policy example is designed to prevent `UPDATE` and `DELETE` operations on protected policies, but the CEL expression incorrectly evaluates `object` instead of `oldObject`. This introduces two major problems:
  - Breaking all deletions: For `DELETE` operations, object is null in a `ValidatingAdmissionPolicy`. Attempting to evaluate `has(object.metadata.labels)` on a null object causes a runtime error. Since the policy uses `failurePolicy: Fail`, it will inadvertently deny all deletions for all admission policies and webhook configurations across the entire cluster, regardless of whether they are protected.
  - Trivial bypass on updates: For `UPDATE` operations, object evaluates the new incoming state. A user could simply update the policy and remove the `platform.example.com/protected` label. The CEL expression would check the new state, see the label is gone, and allow the update. The protection is entirely bypassed.

**The Fix**: The CEL expression should check the existing state of the resource by using `oldObject`. This fixes both the null issue on deletes and the label-removal bypass on updates.

```suggestion
      !has(oldObject.metadata.labels) ||
      !('platform.example.com/protected' in oldObject.metadata.labels) ||
      oldObject.metadata.labels['platform.example.com/protected'] != 'true'
```

----

Checks out: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/#validation-expression

    message: "Protected admission resources cannot be modified or deleted"
---
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding
metadata:
  name: "protect-policies-binding.static.k8s.io"
spec:
  policyName: "protect-policies.static.k8s.io"
  validationActions:
  - Deny
```

With this in place, any API-based admission policy or webhook configuration
labeled `platform.example.com/protected: "true"` is shielded from tampering.
The protection itself lives on disk and can't be removed through the API.

## A few things to know

Manifest-based configurations are intentionally self-contained. They can't
reference API resources, which means no `paramKind` for policies, no
service references for webhooks (URL-only), and bindings must reference
policies in the same manifest set. These restrictions exist because the
configurations need to work without any cluster state, including at startup
before etcd is available.

If you run multiple API server instances, each one loads its own manifest
files independently. There's no cross-server synchronization built in. This
is the same model as other file-based API server configurations like

> encryption at rest. We expose a configuration hash in metrics so you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encryption at rest. When this new feature is enabled, Kubernetes exposes a configuration hash as a label on relevant metrics, so you can
```
?

detect drift.

Files are watched for changes at runtime, so you don't need to restart the
API server to update policies. If you update a manifest file, the API
server validates the new configuration and swaps it in atomically. If
validation fails, it keeps the previous good configuration and logs the
error. This means you can roll out policy changes across your fleet using
standard configuration management tools (Ansible, Puppet, or even mounted
ConfigMaps) without any API server downtime.

The initial load at startup is stricter: if any manifest is invalid, the
API server won't start. This is intentional. At startup, failing fast is
safer than running without your expected policies.

## Try it out

To try this in Kubernetes v1.36:

1. Enable the `ManifestBasedAdmissionControlConfig` feature gate on the
   kube-apiserver.
2. Create a directory with your manifest files.
3. Add `staticManifestsDir` to your `AdmissionConfiguration`.
4. Start the API server with `--admission-control-config-file` pointing to
   your configuration.

The full documentation is at
[Manifest-Based Admission Control](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/manifest-admission-control/),
and you can follow

> [KEP-5793](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/5793-manifest-based-admission-control-config)

Reviewer: Better: hyperlink to https://kep.k8s.io/5793
